---
title: "Bubble thoughts"
date: 2025-08-19
---
I have now finished eight weeks at the Manchester Centre for Non-linear Dynamics, where I was interning in armoured bubbles.
They're very pretty looking, although I haven't been able to get photos onto this site yet. 

An armoured bubble, or granular raspberry (as some prefer) is a bubble, immersed in water, that is coated in a monolayer of hydrophobic beads. Read that again but more slowly. I have been making them using a beaker of dry hydrophobic beads and sort of blasting the tap into it, scientific as it is. What this does is adds water (crucial) as well as entraining air (doubly crucial) in a very turbulent manner, so beads and bubbles are flying around and crashing into each other all over the place. The reason that they form is due to the hydrophobicity of the beads: They don't want to be surrounded by water. It is energetically preferable for them to be at the air-water interface that is the surface of the bubble, and so they stick. Part of my investigation was to attempt to figure out where on the surface of a bead this air-water interface lies. I concluded eventually that they are stuck pretty much right on the outside of the bubble, i.e. not much of the bead falls inside of it. I then did some fitting data to curves to attempt to figure out the packing fraction of the beads (~0.38, considerably less than the random close-packing of spheres which sits at 0.64 (checks out since the situation can be thought of as 2- or 3-D)) and also crushed them using a purpose-built apparatus. MCND has a laboratory technician, which I think must be one of the greatest jobs in the world: building things for a group of scientists who are all working on their own niche and sometimes bizarre projects. I also had a brief foray into the buoyancy of the bubbles. They're all quite close to beign neutrally buoyant, with those made with larger grains being more likely to sink due to there being more weight on the bubble. Conversely, the buoyant force takes precedence for smaller grains. 

An extension of this project has been listed among the potential MPhys projects for next year. I won't be continuing on it because I need to experience the wider world of experimental physics, but I hope to hear about where it goes next - it's a fascinating little project that's a lot of fun.
